# thalamic-distinct-burst

This repository contains some of the sample scripts used in the simulations performed in the publication Desai, Nidhi Vasant, and Carmen Varela. 
"Distinct burst properties contribute to the functional diversity of thalamic nuclei." 
Journal of Comparative Neurology (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.25141

Note: Compartment models have been implemented using DynaSim toolbox in MATLAB. Some of the original mechanisms used in the scripts were unchanged. They can be found at https://github.com/asoplata/dynasim-extended-benita-model/tree/master/models. The mechanisms which modified have been added to the models directory but were orginially obtained from https://github.com/asoplata/dynasim-extended-benita-model/tree/master/models.

## Synaptic release probability and thalamocortical transmission
Section 3.7 of the paper discusses the simulations used to study the combined effect of the number of spikes per burst and burst latency on the release probability at a thalamocortical synaptic terminal. This model implemented a neurotransmitter release probability variable (Benita et al., 2012) which remains at a steady-state probability of release, until a presynaptic spike reduces the release probability by a fraction of 0.1 and then it recovers with a time constant of 400 ms. To test the implications of different synaptic release probabilities for thalamocortical transmission, we connected the single compartment model of the thalamic cell with a compartmental model of either one pyramidal cell or an interneuron. The thalamic cell model was made to produce spikes with the same number of spikes and latency as we found in our in-vitro cell population. The cortical cells have the same currents and parameters used in the network model of Benita et al. (2012), except we lowered the equilibrium potential for the leak current in the Pyramidal cell to −70 mV (Benita et al., 2012 used −60.95 mV) to increase the dynamic range of excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) amplitudes evoked by the thalamic cell. Some of the scripts used for the simulations whose results are shown in Figure 9 can be found in the synaptic_release_probability_model folder.

## Rebound burst frequencies in thalamocortical neurons
Neurons with the longer latencies may not be able to burst in response to high frequency inhibitory input. This would mean that burst latency sets an upper limit on the frequency of the input that a thalamocortical neuron is able to keep up with. By varing Vshift, we varied the latency of the burst produced. The effect of input with different frequrency to thalamo-cortical cell were studies in terms of the fraction of inputs that were able to cause the TC cell to burst. Some of the scripts used for the simulations whose results are shown in Figure 10c can be found in the frequency_response_model folder.

## Shifting the voltage dependence and size of the T current
To study which properties of the T-type calcium channel can account for bursts with different combinations of number of spikes and latencies, we implemented a single compartment model of a thalamocortical cell. Section 3.5 and Figure 6 discusses simulations where we shifted the activation M∞ and inactivation H∞ curves of the T current to more depolarized values up to 20 mV and gT from 0.15 to 1 mS/cm2. Some of the scripts used for the simulations whose results are shown in Figure 10c can be found in the replicating_burst_properties folder.
